chepter 1 Articles

This chapter deals with three small words ‘a’, ‘an’ and ‘the’ - ‘yes’ the articles.
They have a unique importance in every sentence.
At the end of this chapter, we will be able to -
1) use definite and indefinite articles.
2) explain example,s where articles are omitted.
3) explain nouns used in general and special sense.
1.1 INTRODUCTION
Article is a word which points out at a person, thing or place spoken of. Thus
article refers to the noun.
There are two types of articles. Definite and Indefinite article. Definite article tells
us about a specific person or this while indefinite article speaks of any person thing or
place.
In some cases, as we see ahead nouns may be referred to without any article.
1.2 TYPES OF ARTICLES
The unit at first introduces rules for correct use of articles in sentences.
There are two Articles - a (or. an) and the
A or an is called the Indefinite Article, as it leaves indefinite the person or thing
spoken of as : A doctor, A school, A man, A woman - here a points out any doctor, any
school or any man or woman.

The is called the Definite Article, as it normally points out some particular
person or thing as : He saw the doctor - where the points out some particular doctor.
The indefinite article is used before singular countable nouns e.g. A book, An
orange, A girl The definite article is used before singular countable nouns, plural countable
and uncountable nouns, for example, The book, the books, the milk
A or An
The choice between a and an is determined by sound before a word beginning
with a vowel sound an is used : For example,, an egg, an orange an honest man, an hour. A and
An are used with the singular number only.
1.3 USE OF THE DEFINITE ARTICLE
1. When we talk about a particular person or thing, or one already referred to earlier,
2. When a singular noun is meant to represent a whole class
for example, The cow is a useful animal,
The rose is the sweetest of all flowers
3. Before some proper names :
for example,, oceans and seas: the Pacific, the black sea
rivers : the Ganga, the Nile
4. Before the names of certain books :
for example,, The Vedas, the Puranas, the Ramayana
5. Before names of things unique of their kind; as
for example,, The sun, the sky, the earth
6. Before a Proper noun when it is qualified by an adjective or a defining adjectival
clause :
for example,, The great Caesar, The immortal Shakespeare
7. With Superlatives
for example,, The darkest cloud has a silver lining, This is the best book of elementary
chemistry.
8. With ordinals :
for example,, He was the first man to arrive, The ninth chapter of the book is very interesting.
9. Before an adjective when the noun is understood,
for example,, The poor is always with us.
10. Before a noun to give the force of a Superlative
for example,, The Verb is the word in a sentence.
11. As an Adverb with Comparatives :
for example,, The more the merrier.
12. Uncountable nouns take the when used in a particular sense (especially when
qualified by an adjective of adjectival phrase of clause) for example,, Would you pass me
the sugar! The wisdom of Solomon is great
1.4 USE OF THE INDEFINITE ARTICLE
1. In its original numerical sense of one:
for example,, Twelve inches make a foot. Not a word was said
2. In a vague sense of a certain
for example,, One evening a beggar came to my door
3. In the sense of any, to single out an individual as the representative of a class: for
example,, A pupil should obey his teacher A cow is a useful animal
4. To make a common noun of a proper noun:
for example,, A Daniel come to judgement! (A Daniel - a very wise man)
1.5 OMISSION OF THE ARTICLE
1. Before names of substances, proper and abstract nouns (uncountable nouns)
used in a general sense:
for example,, Sugar is bad for your teeth.
Gold is a precious metal
Delhi is the capital of India
Wisdom is the gift of heaven
2. Before plural countable nouns used in a general sense:
for example,, Children like chocolates
Computers are used in many offices
3. Before languages
for example,, We are studying English
They speak Punjabi at home
4. Before predicative nouns denoting a unique position ie., a position that is normally
held at one time by one person only:
for example,, He was elected Chairman of the Board
Mr. Mathur became Principal of the School in 1999.