
Chapter : 2
preposition
2.1 introduction
A preposition is a word placed before a noun or a pronoun to show in what relation
the person or thing denoted by it stands in rexampleard to something else.
The word preposition means ‘that which is placed before’.
The noun or pronoun which is used with a preposition is called its Object.
A preposition may have two or more objects as:
for example., The road runs over hill and plain.
A preposition is often placed before its object, but sometimes follows it : for example.,
1) Here is the watch that you asked for.
 2)What are you looking at?
The Preposition for, from, in, on are often omitted before nouns of place or time as:
 for example., We did it last week.



2.2 kind of Position
Prepositions may be arranged in the following classes:




1. Simple Preposition :
At, by, for, from, in, of, off, on, out, through, till, to, up, with.
2. Compound Prepositions :
which are generally formed by prefixing a preposition to a Noun, an Adjective or an
Adverb.
About, Above, Across, Along, Amidst, Among, Before, Behind, Beside, Between,
Inside, Outside, Underneath, Within, Without.
3. Phrase Preposition :
which is a group of words used with the force of a single preposition
for example., According to, in accordance with, in place of, along with, in course of, owing
to, with a view to, in order to, for the sake of.
4. Preposition of Place :
About, across, among, before, between below, behind, from, through, near, on,
over, under, upon, within, round, without, beside into.
5. Preposition of Time :
After, at, in, on, during, since, through, throughout, towards, from, during, into,
behind.
At – is used to indicate a definite point of time:
for example., He came at 8 o’clock, I shall tell him the fact at the right time.
In – is used to indicate year, century, morning, evening, time period (in years,
hours, days, months) seasons etc as:
for example., I get up early in the morning. It shall be completed in four hours/months.
On – is used in expressing days and dates, as
for example., My school shall reopen on Monday, India was declared independent on 15th
August 1947.
From and To – from is used to indicate the bexampleinning of an action, and to indicate
the time when the action ends.
for example., The Diwali vacation is From 15th October to 22nd October 2005.
6. Preposition of Agency, instrumentality
Sell goods at auction, sent the parcel by post, heard this through a friend, cut it with
7. Preposition of manner
Fought with courage, worked with earnestness, won with ease
8. Preposition of cause, reason, purpose
Labored for the good of humanity, did it for our good, does it from perversity, concealed
it through shame, lost his purse through nexampleligence, shivers with fever, took medicine
for cold.
9. Preposition of Possession
The mosque of Omar, a man of means, the boy with red hair
10. Preposition of measure, standard, rate, value : as
He charges interest at nine per cent, Stories like these must be taken at what they
are worth.
Cloth is sold by the yard. It was one by the tower-clock.
11. Preposition of contrast, concession : as,
For one enemy he has a hundred friends. For one enemy he has a hundred friends.
With (in spite of) all his faults I admire him.
12. Preposition of Inference, motive, source or origin : as
From what I know of him, I hesitate to trust him. He did it from gratitude. Light
emanates from the sun. This is a quotation from Milton.
Note :- It will be seen that the same preposition, according to the way in which it is
used, would have its place under several heads.
2.3 PREPOSITIONS THAT REQUIRE SPECIAL NOTICE
The following prepositions require special notice :
1. We can use in or at with the names cities, towns or villages. We can use in when
we are talking about a place as an area, we use at when we see it as a point.
for example., We stayed in Mumbai for five days.
How long have you lived in this village?
2. We use at to talk about group activities and shops/workplaces
for example., Did you see Shobha at the party?
 There weren’t many people at the meeting.
3. We use in with the names of streets and at when we give the house-number.
for example., He lives in Church Street
He lives at 45 Church Street.
4. We use on when we think of a place as a surface
for example., The dog is lying on the floor
Put this picture on the wall.
5. Till is used of time and to of place
for example., He slept till eight o’clock
He walked to the end of the street
6. With often denotes the instrument and by the agent
for example., He killed two birds with one shot
He was stabbed by a lunatic with a dagger.
7. Since is used before a noun or phrase denoting some point of time and is preceded
by a verb in the perfect tenses, as
for example., I have eaten nothing since yesterday.
He has been ill since Monday last.
8. In before a noun denoting a period of time, means at the end of, within means
before the end of, as
for example., I shall return in an hour, I shall return within an hour.
9. Beside means at (or by) the side of, while besides means in addition to, as:
for example., Besides his children, there were present his nephew and niece.
Besides being fined, he was sentenced to a term of imprisonment.

Prepositions of Place
Where is it?
2.4 some special Positions
Special Preposition :
than – This word is usually a Conjunction, but is sometimes used as a Preposition,
for example., I cannot accept less than forty rupees for this article.
but – As a rule but is a conjunction, when used as a preposition, but means
‘except’, ‘with the exception of’:
for example., None but the brave deserves the fair.
She returned all the gifts but one.
a – In some sentences, a is a weakened form of the preposition on,
for example., Her wages are ten rupees a day
I meet him once a week
Picture It Clip Art Preposition Example
at “I got to work at 8.00
(a time) this morning.”
on “I’ll see you on
(a day) Tuesday.”
on “I have an
(a date) appointment on the 31st.”
in “My birthday is in
(a month) June”
in “I was born in 1959”
(a year)
in “I get up in the
(the morning) morning.”
Prepositions of Time