
Chapter 4
part of	speech
4.1 INTRODUCTION
Words are divided into different kinds or classes, called parts of speech, according
to their use or according to the work they do in a sentence. They are eight in number:
1. Noun
2. Adjective
3. Pronoun
4. Verb
5. Adverb
6. Preposition
7. Conjunction
8. Interjection
4.2 DEFINITION OF VARIOUS PARTS OF SPEECH
1. A Noun is a word used as the name of a person, place or thing.
for example, His courage won him honour.
type of nouns
Common and Proper Nouns
A common noun is any nonspecific person, place or thing.

A proper noun is any specific person, place, living being, or thing. A proper noun can be a name, places, companies, and trademarks. In the English language, all proper nouns are capitalized, which makes them easy to recognize.

Examples
In comparing common and proper nouns, the word cat can be used to describe many things, which makes it a common noun. Describing an animal as a thing happens in grammar but not biology since they're living beings. (J.D. Meyer) However, you could be more specific and identify a certain cat as being Garfield or Felix, which would make it a proper noun.
2. An Adjective is a word used to add something to the meaning of the noun.
for example, He is a brave boy.
Attributive adjectives are part of the noun phrase headed by the noun they modify; for example, happy is an attributive adjective in "happy people". In some languages, attributive adjectives precede their nouns; in others, they follow their nouns; and in yet others, it depends on the adjective, or on the exact relationship of the adjective to the noun.
Predicative adjectives are linked via a copuNominal adjectives act almost as nouns. One way this can happen is if a noun is elided and an attributive adjective is left behind. In the sentence, "I read two books to them; he preferred the sad book, but she preferred the happy", happy is a nominal adjective, short for "happy one" or "happy book".la or other linking mechanism to the noun or pronoun they modify; for example, happy is a predicate adjective in "they are happy" and in "that made me happy."


3. A Pronoun is a word used instead of a noun.
for example, The books are where you left them.
4. A Verb is used to express action or state.
for example, The girl wrote a letter to her cousin.
5. An Adverb is used to add something to the meaning of the verb, an adjective or
another adverb.
for example, She pronounced the word quite correctly.
She sang loudly (loudly modifies the verb sang, indicating the manner of singing)
We left it here (here modifies the verb phrase left it, indicating place)
I worked yesterday (yesterday modifies the verb worked, indicating time)
You often make mistakes (often modifies the verb phrase make mistakes, indicating frequency)
He undoubtedly did it (undoubtedly modifies the verb phrase did it, indicating certainty)
6. A Preposition is a word used with a noun or a pronoun to show how the person or
thing denoted by the noun or pronoun stands in relation to something else.
for example, The girl is fond of music.


7. A Conjunction is a word used to join words or sentences.
for example, Two and two make four.
You either do your work or prepare for a trip to the office. (Either do or prepare)
He is not only handsome but also brilliant. (Not only A but also B)
Neither the basketball team nor the football team is doing well.
Both the cross country team and the swimming team are doing well.
You must decide whether you stay or you go.
Just as many Americans love basketball, so many Canadians love ice hockey.
8. An interjection is a word which expresses some sudden feeling.
for example, Hurray ! We have won the game.
Some modern grammars include Determiners among the parts of speech.
Determiners are words like a, an, the, this, these, those, every, each, some, any, my, his,
one, two etc., which determine or limit the meaning of the nouns that follow.
As the words are divided into different classes according to the work they do in
sentences, it is clear that we cannot say to which part of speech a word belongs unless
we see it used in a sentence. for example,
They arrived soon after. (Adverb)
They arrived after us. (Preposition)
They arrived after we had left. (Conjunction)