Chapter : 5
Transformation of Sentences to active and passive
5.1 INTRODUCTION
The transformation of a sentence means changing its form without affecting its
sense. It can be brought about by one of the following ways -
1. Changing the manner of speech. Direct to Indirect or Vice a versa.
2. Changing the voice of a sentence from active to passive and vice a versa.
3. Changing the style of a sentence from assertive to exclamatory and vice a versa.
4. Changing the degree of a sentence. Comparative to Superlative and Vice a Versa.
The Transformation or conversion of a sentence means changing its form without
affecting its sense. The phrase can be expanded into a clause and a clause contracted
into a phrase : That is the form of a sentence can be changed without changing the
meaning. The conversion or transformation of a sentence is an excellent exercise as it
teaches us a variety of expression in written English.
5.2 DIRECT & INDIRECT SPEECH
Direct speech: gives the exact words of the speaker, in the first person. If it
occurs in an ordinary narrative, it is marked off by inverted commas, and a new paragraph
is given to each speaker.

5.3 ACTIVE & PASSIVE VOICE
A sentence in the Active form can be changed into the passive form, and vice versa : -
Compare : 1) Jack helps John.
2) John is helped by Jack.
In sentence above have the same meaning. Sentence1, shows, the form of verb
shows that the person denoted by subject Jack does something. Hence, the verb is said
to be in Active Form / Voice.
In sentence2, Something is done to the person denoted by the subject John. the
form of verb ‘is helped’ is said to be in the Passive Form / Voice’.
5.4 EXCLAMATORY & ASSERTIVE SENTENCE
Exclamatory Assertive
1) What a wonderful opportunity! 1) It is a very wonderful opportunity
2) Oh, that I were young again! 2) I wish I were young again.
3) How kind of you to help him 3) It is very kind of you to help
like that! him that.
4) How noble he is! 4) He is truly noble.
5) What a great pleasure it is! 5) This is indeed a great pleasure.
5.5 TRANSFORMATION OF SENTENCES
Change of Degree of comparison of an adjective or adverb in a sentence without changing
the meaning of the sentence.
Direct
1) The teacher said, “The earth
is round.”
2) He said, “The sun rises in
the East.”
3) He said, “Honesty is the
best policy.”
4) He said, “Your bag is here.”
5) She said, “I will go to
Bombay tomorrow”.
6) The fox said, “These grapes
are sour.”
7) The child said to his mother,
“I am very hungry now.”
Indirect
1) The teacher said that the
earth is round.
2) He said that the Sun rises in
the East.
3) He said that honesty is the
best policy.
4) He said that his bag was
there.
5) She said that she would go
to Bombay the next day.
6) The fox said that those
grapes were sour.
7) The child told his mother that
he was very hungry then.
Active
1) Brutus stabbed Caesar.
2) Who taught you grammar?
3) The King gave him a reward.
4) One should keep one’s
promises.
5) Give him order.
6) The enemy has defeated our
Army.
Passive
1) Caesar was stabbed by Brutus.
2) By whom were you taught
grammar? By whom was
grammar taught to you?
3) He was given a reward by the
king. A reward was given to him
by the King.
4) Promises should be kept.
5) Let the order be given.
6) Our army has been defeated.
Exclamatory & Assertive
Sentences
Change of Degree : three degrees.
Positive degree -(as + as), Comparative Degree- (er + than), superlative most + of
all)
* Change of Degree: When the comparison is between two only.
1) (a) Honey is as sweet as sugar. (+ve degree)
 (b) Sugar is not sweeter than honey. (Comparative degree)
2) (a) This fort is taller than the fort in your town. } (Comparative degree.)
 (b) The fort in your town is not as tall as this fort. } (+ ve degree.)
3) (a) A mango is sweeter than an apple. Comparative)
 (b) An apple is not as sweet as a mango. (Positive)
4) (a) He works harder than his brother.(comparative)
(b) His brother doesn’t work as hard as he. (+ve degree)
(1) (a) The rose is the most beautiful flower. (Superlative degree)
(b) The rose is more beautiful than any other flower. (Comparative)
(c) No other flower is as beautiful as rose.
(2) (a) Mount Everest is the highest peak in the world. (Superlative)
(b) Mount Everest is higher than any other peak in the world.
(Comparative)
(c) No other peak in the world is as high as Mount Everest. (+ve degree)
(3) (a) Napoleon was the bravest of all generals (Superlative)
(b) Napoleon was the bravest than any other general. (Comparative)
(c) No other general was as brave as Napoleon. (+ve degree)
(4) (a) No other metal is as useful as iron.(+ve degree)
(b) Iron is more useful than any other metal (comparative)
(c) Iron is the most useful metal. (OR) Iron is the most useful of all
metals. (Superlative)
5) (a) Gavaskar is better than any other batsman. (Comparative)
(b) Gavaskar is the best batsman OR Gavaskar is the best of all batsman
(Superlative)
(c) No other batsman is as good as Gavaskar. (+ve degree)
Superlative :
(1) Our school is one of the biggest school in Pune. (Superlative)
(2) Our school is bigger than most other schools. (Comparative)
(3) Very few schools in Pune are as big as our school. (+ve degree)
(a) Japan is one of the most advanced country in the world. (Superlative)
(b) Japan is more advanced than most other countries in the world. (Comparative)
(c) Very few countries in the world are as advanced as Japan. (+ve degree)