The Age of Industrialisation

In 1900, a popular music publisher E.T. Paull produced a music
book that had a picture on the cover page announcing the ‘Dawn
of the Century’ (Fig. 1). As you can see from the illustration, at the
centre of the picture is a goddess-like figure, the angel of progress,
bearing the flag of the new century. She is gently perched on a wheel
with wings, symbolising time. Her flight is taking her into the future.
Floating about, behind her, are the signs of progress: railway, camera,
machines, printing press and factory.
This glorification of machines and technology is even more marked
in a picture which appeared on the pages of a trade magazine over
a hundred years ago (Fig. 2). It shows two magicians. The one at the
top is Aladdin from the Orient who built a beautiful palace with his

New words
Orient – The countries to the east of
the Mediterranean, usually referring to
Asia. The term arises out of a western

viewpoint that sees this region as pre-
modern, traditional and mysterious


New York, England, 1900.

India and the Contemporary World

Give two examples where modern development that is
associated with progress has lead to problems. You may like to
think of areas related to environmental issues, nuclear weapons
or disease.
Activity
magic lamp. The one at the bottom is the modern mechanic, who
with his modern tools weaves a new magic: builds bridges, ships,
towers and high-rise buildings. Aladdin is shown as representing the
East and the past, the mechanic stands for the West and modernity.
These images offer us a triumphant account of the modern world.
Within this account the modern world is associated with rapid
technological change and innovations, machines and factories, railways
and steamships. The history of industrialisation thus becomes simply
a story of development, and the modern age appears as a wonderful
time of technological progress.
These images and associations have now become part of popular
imagination. Do you not see rapid industrialisation as a time of
progress and modernity? Do you not think that the spread of railways
and factories, and construction of high-rise buildings and bridges is
a sign of society’s development?
How have these images developed? And how do we relate to these
ideas? Is industrialisation always based on rapid technological
development? Can we today continue to glorify continuous
mechanisation of all work? What has industrialisation meant to
people’s lives? To answer such questions we need to turn to the
history of industrialisation.
In this chapter we will look at this history by focusing first on Britain,
the first industrial nation, and then India, where the pattern of
industrial change was conditioned by colonial rule.





You can see each member of the family involved in the
production of yarn. Notice that one wheel is moving only one
spindle.
1 Before the Industrial Revolution

All too often we associate industrialisation with the growth of
factory industry. When we talk of industrial production we refer
to factory production. When we talk of industrial workers we
mean factory workers. Histories of industrialisation very often begin
with the setting up of the first factories.
There is a problem with such ideas. Even before factories began to
dot the landscape in England and Europe, there was large-scale
industrial production for an international market. This was not based
on factories. Many historians now refer to this phase of
industrialisation as proto-industrialisation.
In the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, merchants from the towns
in Europe began moving to the countryside, supplying money to
peasants and artisans, persuading them to produce for an international
market. With the expansion of world trade and the acquisition of
colonies in different parts of the world, the demand for goods
began growing. But merchants could not expand production within
towns. This was because here urban crafts and trade guilds were
powerful. These were associations of producers that trained
craftspeople, maintained control over production, regulated
competition and prices, and restricted the entry of new people into
the trade. Rulers granted different guilds the monopoly
right to produce and trade in specific products. It was
therefore difficult for new merchants to set up
business in towns. So they turned to the countryside.
In the countryside poor peasants and artisans began
working for merchants. As you have seen in the
textbook last year, this was a time when open fields
were disappearing and commons were being
enclosed. Cottagers and poor peasants who had earlier
depended on common lands for their survival,
gathering their firewood, berries, vegetables, hay and
straw, had to now look for alternative sources of
income. Many had tiny plots of land which could not
provide work for all members of the household. So
when merchants came around and offered advances
to produce goods for them, peasant households
eagerly agreed. By working for the merchants, they



India and the Contemporary World

could remain in the countryside and continue to cultivate their small
plots. Income from proto-industrial production supplemented their
shrinking income from cultivation. It also allowed them a fuller use
of their family labour resources.
Within this system a close relationship developed between the town
and the countryside. Merchants were based in towns but the work
was done mostly in the countryside. A merchant clothier in England
purchased wool from a wool stapler, and carried it to the spinners;
the yarn (thread) that was spun was taken in subsequent stages
of production to weavers, fullers, and then to dyers. The finishing
was done in London before the export merchant sold the cloth in
the international market. London in fact came to be known as a
finishing centre.
This proto-industrial system was thus part of a network of
commercial exchanges. It was controlled by merchants and the goods
were produced by a vast number of producers working within
their family farms, not in factories. At each stage of production 20
to 25 workers were employed by each merchant. This meant that
each clothier was controlling hundreds of workers.
1.1 The Coming Up of the Factory
The earliest factories in England came up by the 1730s. But it
was only in the late eighteenth century that the number of
factories multiplied.
The first symbol of the new era was cotton. Its production boomed
in the late nineteenth century. In 1760 Britain was importing 2.5
million pounds of raw cotton to feed its cotton industry. By 1787
this import soared to 22 million pounds. This increase was linked to
a number of changes within the process of production. Let us look
briefly at some of these.
A series of inventions in the eighteenth century increased the efficacy
of each step of the production process (carding, twisting and
spinning, and rolling). They enhanced the output per worker, enabling
each worker to produce more, and they made possible the
production of stronger threads and yarn. Then Richard Arkwright
created the cotton mill. Till this time, as you have seen, cloth
production was spread all over the countryside and carried out within
village households. But now, the costly new machines could be
purchased, set up and maintained in the mill. Within the mill all the

The artist said: ‘Seen through the humid
atmosphere that makes Lancashire the best
cotton-spinning locality in the world, a huge
cotton-mill aglow with electricity in the
twilight, is a most impressive sight.’


processes were brought together under one roof and management.
This allowed a more careful supervision over the production process,
a watch over quality, and the regulation of labour, all of which had
been difficult to do when production was in the countryside.
In the early nineteenth century, factories increasingly became an
intimate part of the English landscape. So visible were the imposing
new mills, so magical seemed to be the power of new technology,
that contemporaries were dazzled. They concentrated their attention
on the mills, almost forgetting the bylanes and the workshops where
production still continued.

The way in which historians focus on
industrialisation rather than on small
workshops is a good example of how what we
believe today about the past is influenced by
what historians choose to notice and what they
ignore. Note down one event or aspect of your
own life which adults such as your parents or
teachers may think is unimportant, but which
you believe to be important.
Activity
How rapid was the process of industrialisation? Does industrialisation
mean only the growth of factory industries?
First: The most dynamic industries in Britain were clearly cotton and
metals. Growing at a rapid pace, cotton was the leading sector in the
first phase of industrialisation up to the 1840s. After that the iron
and steel industry led the way. With the expansion of railways, in
England from the 1840s and in the colonies from the 1860s, the
demand for iron and steel increased rapidly. By 1873 Britain was
exporting iron and steel worth about £ 77 million, double the value
of its cotton export.



Second: the new industries could not easily displace traditional
industries. Even at the end of the nineteenth century, less than 20 per
cent of the total workforce was employed in technologically
advanced industrial sectors. Textiles was a dynamic sector, but a
large portion of the output was produced not within factories, but
outside, within domestic units.
Third: the pace of change in the ‘traditional’ industries was not set
by steam-powered cotton or metal industries, but they did not remain
entirely stagnant either. Seemingly ordinary and small innovations
were the basis of growth in many non-mechanised sectors such as
food processing, building, pottery, glass work, tanning, furniture
making, and production of implements.
Fourth: technological changes occurred slowly. They did not spread
dramatically across the industrial landscape. New technology was
expensive and merchants and industrialists were cautious about using
it. The machines often broke down and repair was costly. They
were not as effective as their inventors and manufacturers claimed.
Consider the case of the steam engine. James Watt improved the
steam engine produced by Newcomen and patented the new engine
in 1781. His industrialist friend Mathew Boulton manufactured the
new model. But for years he could find no buyers. At the beginning
of the nineteenth century, there were no more than 321 steam engines
all over England. Of these, 80 were
in cotton industries, nine in wool
industries, and the rest in mining,
canal works and iron works. Steam
engines were not used in any of the
other industries till much later in
the century. So even the most
powerful new technology that
enhanced the productivity of
labour manifold was slow to be
accepted by industrialists.
Historians now have come to
increasingly recognise that the typical
worker in the mid-nineteenth century
was not a machine operator but the
traditional craftsperson and labourer.






2 Hand Labour and Steam Power

In Victorian Britain there was no shortage of human labour. Poor
peasants and vagrants moved to the cities in large numbers in search
of jobs, waiting for work. As you will know, when there is plenty of
labour, wages are low. So industrialists had no problem of labour
shortage or high wage costs. They did not want to introduce machines
that got rid of human labour and required large capital investment.
In many industries the demand for labour was seasonal. Gas works
and breweries were especially busy through the cold months. So

they needed more workers to meet their peak demand. Book-
binders and printers, catering to Christmas demand, too needed

extra hands before December. At the waterfront, winter was the
time that ships were repaired and spruced up. In all such industries
where production fluctuated with the season, industrialists usually
preferred hand labour, employing workers for the season.

Will Thorne is one of those who went in search
of seasonal work, loading bricks and doing odd
jobs. He describes how job-seekers walked to
London in search of work:
‘I had always wanted to go to London, and my
desire ... was stimulated by letters from an old
workmate ... who was now working at the Old
Kent Road Gas Works ... I finally decided to go ...
in November, 1881. With two friends I started
out to walk the journey, filled with the hope
that we would be able to obtain employment,
when we get there, with the kind assistance of
my friend ... we had little money when we
started, not enough to pay for our food and
lodgings each night until we arrived in London.
Some days we walked as much as twenty miles,
and other days less. Our money was gone at
the end of the third day ... For two nights we
slept out – once under a haystack, and once in
an old farm shed ... On arrival in London we tried
to find ... my friend ... but ... were unsuccessful.
Our money was gone, so there was nothing for
us to do but to walk around until late at night,
and then try to find some place to sleep. We
found an old building and slept in it that night.
The next day, Sunday, late in the afternoon, we
got to the Old Kent Gas Works, and applied for
work. To my great surprise, the man we had
been looking for was working at the time. He
spoke to the foreman and I was given a job.’
Quoted in Raphael Samuel, ‘Comers and Goers’,
in H.J. Dyos and Michael Wolff, eds, The Victorian
City: Images and Realities, 1973.

A range of products could be produced only with hand
labour. Machines were oriented to producing uniforms,
standardised goods for a mass market. But the demand in the market
was often for goods with intricate designs and specific shapes. In
mid-nineteenth-century Britain, for instance, 500 varieties of
Fig. 8 – People on the move in search of work, The Illustrated
London News, 1879.
Some people were always on the move selling small goods and
looking for temporary work.

Imagine that you are a merchant writing back
to a salesman who has been trying to
persuade you to buy a new machine. Explain
in your letter what you have heard and why you
do not wish to invest in the new technology.
Activity

India and the Contemporary World


hammers were produced and 45 kinds of axes. These required
human skill, not mechanical technology.
In Victorian Britain, the upper classes – the aristocrats and the
bourgeoisie – preferred things produced by hand. Handmade
products came to symbolise refinement and class. They were better

finished, individually produced, and carefully designed. Machine-
made goods were for export to the colonies.

In countries with labour shortage, industrialists were keen on using
mechanical power so that the need for human labour can be
minimised. This was the case in nineteenth-century America. Britain,
however, had no problem hiring human hands.
2.1 Life of the Workers
The abundance of labour in the market affected the lives of workers.
As news of possible jobs travelled to the countryside, hundreds
tramped to the cities. The actual possibility of getting a job depended
on existing networks of friendship and kin relations. If you had
a relative or a friend in a factory, you were more likely to get a

job quickly. But not everyone had social connections. Many job-
seekers had to wait weeks, spending nights under bridges or in night



shelters. Some stayed in Night Refuges that were set up by private
individuals; others went to the Casual Wards maintained by the Poor
Law authorities.
Seasonality of work in many industries meant prolonged periods
without work. After the busy season was over, the poor were on
the streets again. Some returned to the countryside after the winter,
when the demand for labour in the rural areas opened up in places.
But most looked for odd jobs, which till the mid-nineteenth century
were difficult to find.
Wages increased somewhat in the early nineteenth century. But they
tell us little about the welfare of the workers. The average figures
hide the variations between trades and the fluctuations from year to
year. For instance, when prices rose sharply during the prolonged
Napoleonic War, the real value of what the workers earned fell
significantly, since the same wages could now buy fewer things.
Moreover, the income of workers depended not on the wage rate
alone. What was also critical was the period of employment: the
number of days of work determined the average daily income of
the workers. At the best of times till the mid-nineteenth century,
about 10 per cent of the urban population were extremely poor. In
periods of economic slump, like the 1830s, the proportion of
unemployed went up to anything between 35 and 75 per cent in
different regions.
The fear of unemployment made workers hostile to the introduction
of new technology. When the Spinning Jenny was introduced in

A magistrate reported in 1790 about an incident when he was
called in to protect a manufacturer’s property from being attacked
by workers:
‘From the depredations of a lawless Banditti of colliers and their
wives, for the wives had lost their work to spinning engines ... they
advanced at first with much insolence, avowing their intention of
cutting to pieces the machine lately introduced in the woollen
manufacture; which they suppose, if generally adopted, will lessen
the demand for manual labour. The women became clamorous.
The men were more open to conviction and after some
expostulation were induced to desist from their purpose and return
peaceably home.’
J.L. Hammond and B. Hammond, The Skilled Labourer 1760-1832,
quoted in Maxine Berg, The Age of Manufactures.


the woollen industry, women who survived on hand spinning began
attacking the new machines. This conflict over the introduction of
the jenny continued for a long time.
After the 1840s, building activity intensified in the cities, opening up
greater opportunities of employment. Roads were widened, new
railway stations came up, railway lines were extended, tunnels dug,
drainage and sewers laid, rivers embanked. The number of workers
employed in the transport industry doubled in the 1840s, and doubled
again in the subsequent 30 years.


3 Industrialisation in the Colonies

Let us now move to India to see how a colony industrialises. Once
again we will look not only at factory industries but also at the
non-mechanised sector. We will limit our discussion primarily to
textile industries.
3.1 The Age of Indian Textiles
Before the age of machine industries, silk and cotton goods from
India dominated the international market in textiles. Coarser cottons
were produced in many countries, but the finer varieties often came
from India. Armenian and Persian merchants took the goods from
Punjab to Afghanistan, eastern Persia and Central Asia. Bales of fine
textiles were carried on camel back via the north-west frontier, through
mountain passes and across deserts. A vibrant sea trade operated
through the main pre-colonial ports. Surat on the Gujarat coast
connected India to the Gulf and Red Sea Ports; Masulipatam on
the Coromandel coast and Hoogly in Bengal had trade links with
Southeast Asian ports.
A variety of Indian merchants and bankers were involved in this
network of export trade – financing production, carrying goods
and supplying exporters. Supply merchants linked the port towns to
the inland regions. They gave advances to weavers, procured the
woven cloth from weaving villages, and carried the supply to the
ports. At the port, the big shippers and export merchants had brokers
who negotiated the price and bought goods from the supply
merchants operating inland.
By the 1750s this network, controlled by Indian merchants, was
breaking down.
The European companies gradually gained power – first securing a
variety of concessions from local courts, then the monopoly rights
to trade. This resulted in a decline of the old ports of Surat and
Hoogly through which local merchants had operated. Exports from
these ports fell dramatically, the credit that had financed the earlier
trade began drying up, and the local bankers slowly went bankrupt.
In the last years of the seventeenth century, the gross value of trade
that passed through Surat had been Rs 16 million. By the 1740s it
had slumped to Rs 3 million.

On a map of Asia, find and draw the sea and
land links of the textile trade from India to
Central Asia, West Asia and Southeast Asia.
Activity

While Surat and Hoogly decayed, Bombay and Calcutta grew. This
shift from the old ports to the new ones was an indicator of the
growth of colonial power. Trade through the new ports came to
be controlled by European companies, and was carried in European
ships. While many of the old trading houses collapsed, those that
wanted to survive had to now operate within a network shaped by
European trading companies.
How did these changes affect the life of weavers and other artisans?
3.2 What Happened to Weavers?
The consolidation of East India Company power after the 1760s
did not initially lead to a decline in textile exports from India. British
cotton industries had not yet expanded and Indian fine textiles were
in great demand in Europe. So the company was keen on expanding
textile exports from India.
Before establishing political power in Bengal and Carnatic in the
1760s and 1770s, the East India Company had found it difficult to
ensure a regular supply of goods for export. The French, Dutch,
Fig. 13 – The English factory at Surat, a seventeenth-century drawing.


Portuguese as well as the local traders competed in the market
to secure woven cloth. So the weaver and supply merchants
could bargain and try selling the produce to the best buyer. In
their letters back to London, Company officials continuously
complained of difficulties of supply and the high prices.
However, once the East India Company established political
power, it could assert a monopoly right to trade. It proceeded
to develop a system of management and control that would
eliminate competition, control costs, and ensure regular supplies
of cotton and silk goods. This it did through a series of steps.
First: the Company tried to eliminate the existing traders and
brokers connected with the cloth trade, and establish a more
direct control over the weaver. It appointed a paid servant called
the gomastha to supervise weavers, collect supplies, and examine
the quality of cloth.
Second: it prevented Company weavers from dealing with other
buyers. One way of doing this was through the system of advances.
Once an order was placed, the weavers were given loans to purchase
the raw material for their production. Those who took loans had to
hand over the cloth they produced to the gomastha. They could not
take it to any other trader.
As loans flowed in and the demand for fine textiles expanded,
weavers eagerly took the advances, hoping to earn more. Many
weavers had small plots of land which they had earlier cultivated
along with weaving, and the produce from this took care of their
family needs. Now they had to lease out the land and devote all their
time to weaving. Weaving, in fact, required the labour of the entire
family, with children and women all engaged in different stages of
the process.
Soon, however, in many weaving villages there were reports of
clashes between weavers and gomasthas. Earlier supply merchants had
very often lived within the weaving villages, and had a close
relationship with the weavers, looking after their needs and helping
them in times of crisis. The new gomasthas were outsiders, with no
long-term social link with the village. They acted arrogantly, marched
into villages with sepoys and peons, and punished weavers for delays
in supply – often beating and flogging them. The weavers lost the
space to bargain for prices and sell to different buyers: the price they
received from the Company was miserably low and the loans they
had accepted tied them to the Company.


In many places in Carnatic and Bengal, weavers deserted villages
and migrated, setting up looms in other villages where they had
some family relation. Elsewhere, weavers along with the village
traders revolted, opposing the Company and its officials. Over time
many weavers began refusing loans, closing down their workshops
and taking to agricultural labour.
By the turn of the nineteenth century, cotton weavers faced a
new set of problems.
3.3 Manchester Comes to India
In 1772, Henry Patullo, a Company official, had ventured to
say that the demand for Indian textiles could never reduce, since
no other nation produced goods of the same quality. Yet by
the beginning of the nineteenth century we see the beginning of
a long decline of textile exports from India. In 1811-12
piece-goods accounted for 33 per cent of India’s exports; by
1850-51 it was no more than 3 per cent.
Why did this happen? What were its implications?
As cotton industries developed in England, industrial groups began
worrying about imports from other countries. They pressurised
the government to impose import duties on cotton textiles so that
Manchester goods could sell in Britain without facing any
competition from outside. At the same time industrialists persuaded
the East India Company to sell British manufactures in Indian
markets as well. Exports of British cotton goods increased
dramatically in the early nineteenth century. At the end of the
eighteenth century there had been virtually no import of cotton
piece-goods into India. But by 1850 cotton piece-goods constituted
over 31 per cent of the value of Indian imports; and by the 1870s
this figure was over 50 per cent.
Cotton weavers in India thus faced two problems at the same time:
their export market collapsed, and the local market shrank, being
glutted with Manchester imports. Produced by machines at lower
costs, the imported cotton goods were so cheap that weavers could
not easily compete with them. By the 1850s, reports from most
weaving regions of India narrated stories of decline and desolation.
By the 1860s, weavers faced a new problem. They could not get
sufficient supply of raw cotton of good quality. When the American

The Commissioner of Patna wrote:
‘It appears that twenty yeas ago, a brisk trade
was carried on in the manufacture of cloth at
Jahanabad, and Behar, which has in the former
place entirely ceased, while in the latter the
amount of manufacture is very limited, in
consequence of the cheap and durable goods
from Manchester with which the Native
manufactures are unable to compete.’
Quoted in J. Krishnamurty, ‘Deindustrialisation in
Gangetic Bihar during the nineteenth century’,
The Indian Economic and Social History Review,
1985.


Reporting on the Koshtis, a community of
weavers, the Census Report of Central Provinces
stated:
‘The Koshtis, like the weavers of the finer kinds
of cloth in other parts of India, have fallen upon
evil times. They are unable to compete with the
showy goods which Manchester sends in such
profusion, and they have of late years emigrated
in great numbers, chiefly to Berar, where as day
labourers they are able to obtain wages ...’
Census Report of Central Provinces, 1872, quoted
in Sumit Guha, ‘The handloom industry in Central
India, 1825-1950’, The Indian Economic and Social
History Review.

Civil War broke out and cotton supplies from the US were cut
off, Britain turned to India. As raw cotton exports from India
increased, the price of raw cotton shot up. Weavers in India
were starved of supplies and forced to buy raw cotton at
exorbitant prices. In this, situation weaving could not pay.
Then, by the end of the nineteenth century, weavers and other
craftspeople faced yet another problem. Factories in India began
production, flooding the market with machine- goods. How could
weaving industries possibly survive?
Fig. 15 – Bombay harbour, a late-eighteenth-century drawing.
Bombay and Calcutta grew as trading ports from the 1780s. This marked the decline of the old trading order
and the growth of the colonial economy.

The first cotton mill in Bombay came up in 1854 and it went into
production two years later. By 1862 four mills were at work with
94,000 spindles and 2,150 looms. Around the same time jute mills
came up in Bengal, the first being set up in 1855 and another one
seven years later, in 1862. In north India, the Elgin Mill was started
in Kanpur in the 1860s, and a year later the first cotton mill of
Ahmedabad was set up. By 1874, the first spinning and weaving
mill of Madras began production.
Who set up the industries? Where did the capital come from? Who
came to work in the mills?
4.1 The Early Entrepreneurs
Industries were set up in different regions by varying sorts of people.
Let us see who they were.
The history of many business groups goes back to trade with China.
From the late eighteenth century, as you have read in your book last
year, the British in India began exporting opium to China and took
tea from China to England. Many Indians became junior players in
this trade, providing finance, procuring supplies, and shipping
consignments. Having earned through trade, some of these
businessmen had visions of developing industrial enterprises in India.
In Bengal, Dwarkanath Tagore made his fortune in the China trade
before he turned to industrial investment, setting up six joint-stock
companies in the 1830s and 1840s. Tagore’s enterprises sank along
with those of others in the wider business crises of the 1840s, but
later in the nineteenth century many of the China traders became
successful industrialists. In Bombay, Parsis like Dinshaw Petit and
Jamsetjee Nusserwanjee Tata who built huge industrial empires in
India, accumulated their initial wealth partly from exports to China,
and partly from raw cotton shipments to England. Seth Hukumchand,
a Marwari businessman who set up the first Indian jute mill in
Calcutta in 1917, also traded with China. So did the father as well as
grandfather of the famous industrialist G.D. Birla.
Capital was accumulated through other trade networks. Some
merchants from Madras traded with Burma while others had links
with the Middle East and East Africa. There were yet other

commercial groups, but they were not directly involved in external
trade. They operated within India, carrying goods from one place
to another, banking money, transferring funds between cities, and
financing traders. When opportunities of investment in industries
opened up, many of them set up factories.
As colonial control over Indian trade tightened, the space within
which Indian merchants could function became increasingly limited.
They were barred from trading with Europe in manufactured goods,
and had to export mostly raw materials and food grains – raw
cotton, opium, wheat and indigo – required by the British. They
were also gradually edged out of the shipping business.
Till the First World War, European Managing Agencies in fact
controlled a large sector of Indian industries. Three of the biggest
ones were Bird Heiglers & Co., Andrew Yule, and Jardine Skinner
& Co. These Agencies mobilised capital, set up joint-stock companies
and managed them. In most instances Indian financiers provided
the capital while the European Agencies made all investment and
business decisions. The European merchant-industrialists had their
own chambers of commerce which Indian businessmen were not
allowed to join.
4.2 Where Did the Workers Come From?
Factories needed workers. With the expansion of factories, this
demand increased. In 1901, there were 584,000 workers in Indian
factories. By 1946 the number was over 2,436, 000. Where did the
workers come from?
In most industrial regions workers came from the districts around.
Peasants and artisans who found no work in the village went to the
industrial centres in search of work. Over 50 per cent workers in the
Bombay cotton industries in 1911 came from the neighbouring
district of Ratnagiri, while the mills of Kanpur got most of their
textile hands from the villages within the district of Kanpur. Most
often millworkers moved between the village and the city, returning
to their village homes during harvests and festivals.
Over time, as news of employment spread, workers travelled great
distances in the hope of work in the mills. From the United Provinces,
for instance, they went to work in the textile mills of Bombay and in
the jute mills of Calcutta.

Getting jobs was always difficult, even when mills multiplied and
the demand for workers increased. The numbers seeking work were
always more than the jobs available. Entry into the mills was also
restricted. Industrialists usually employed a jobber to get new recruits.
Very often the jobber was an old and trusted worker. He got people
from his village, ensured them jobs, helped them settle in the city
and provided them money in times of crisis. The jobber therefore
became a person with some authority and power. He began
demanding money and gifts for his favour and controlling the lives
of workers.
The number of factory workers increased over time. However,
as you will see, they were a small proportion of the total
industrial workforce.

Vasant Parkar, who was once a millworker in Bombay, said:
‘The workers would pay the jobbers money to get their sons work
in the mill ... The mill worker was closely associated with his village,
physically and emotionally. He would go home to cut the harvest
and for sowing. The Konkani would go home to cut the paddy
and the Ghati, the sugarcane. It was an accepted practice for
which the mills granted leave.’
Meena Menon and Neera Adarkar, One Hundred Years: One Hundred
Voices, 2004.Bhai Bhosle, a trade unionist of Bombay,
recollected his childhood in the 1930s and 1940s:
‘In those days, the shift was 10 hours – from
5 pm to 3 am – terrible working hours. My father
worked for 35 years; he got the asthma like
disease and could not work any more...Then my
father went back to village.’
Meena Menon and Neera Adarkar, One Hundred
Years: One Hundred Voices.


5 The Peculiarities of Industrial Growth

European Managing Agencies, which dominated industrial
production in India, were interested in certain kinds of products.
They established tea and coffee plantations, acquiring land at cheap
rates from the colonial government; and they invested in mining,
indigo and jute. Most of these were products required primarily for
export trade and not for sale in India.
When Indian businessmen began setting up industries in the late
nineteenth century, they avoided competing with Manchester goods
in the Indian market. Since yarn was not an important part of British
imports into India, the early cotton mills in India produced coarse
cotton yarn (thread) rather than fabric. When yarn was imported it
was only of the superior variety. The yarn produced in Indian spinning
mills was used by handloom weavers in India or exported to China.
By the first decade of the twentieth century a series of changes
affected the pattern of industrialisation. As the swadeshi movement
gathered momentum, nationalists mobilised people to boycott foreign
cloth. Industrial groups organised themselves to protect their collective
interests, pressurising the government to increase tariff protection
and grant other concessions. From 1906, moreover, the export of
Indian yarn to China declined since produce from Chinese and
Japanese mills flooded the Chinese market.
So industrialists in India began shifting from

yarn to cloth production. Cotton piece-
goods production in India doubled between

1900 and 1912.
Yet, till the First World War, industrial growth
was slow. The war created a dramatically
new situation. With British mills busy with
war production to meet the needs of the
army, Manchester imports into India
declined. Suddenly, Indian mills had a vast
home market to supply. As the war
prolonged, Indian factories were called
upon to supply war needs: jute bags, cloth
for army uniforms, tents and leather boots,
horse and mule saddles and a host of other
items. New factories were set up and old

ones ran multiple shifts. Many new workers were employed and
everyone was made to work longer hours. Over the war years
industrial production boomed.
After the war, Manchester could never recapture its old position in
the Indian market. Unable to modernise and compete with the US,
Germany and Japan, the economy of Britain crumbled after the
war. Cotton production collapsed and exports of cotton cloth from
Britain fell dramatically. Within the colonies, local industrialists
gradually consolidated their position, substituting foreign
manufactures and capturing the home market.
5.1 Small-scale Industries Predominate
While factory industries grew steadily after the war, large industries
formed only a small segment of the economy. Most of them –
about 67 per cent in 1911 – were located in Bengal and Bombay.
Over the rest of the country, small-scale production continued to
predominate. Only a small proportion of the total industrial labour
force worked in registered factories: 5 per cent in 1911 and 10 per
cent in 1931. The rest worked in small workshops and household
units, often located in alleys and bylanes, invisible to the passer-by.
In fact, in some instances, handicrafts production actually expanded
in the twentieth century. This is true even in the case of the handloom
sector that we have discussed. While cheap machine-made thread
wiped out the spinning industry in the nineteenth century, the weavers
survived, despite problems. In the twentieth century, handloom
cloth production expanded steadily: almost trebling between 1900
and 1940.
How did this happen?
This was partly because of technological changes. Handicrafts people
adopt new technology if that helps them improve production
without excessively pushing up costs. So, by the second decade of
the twentieth century we find weavers using looms with a fly shuttle.
This increased productivity per worker, speeded up production and
reduced labour demand. By 1941, over 35 per cent of handlooms
in India were fitted with fly shuttles: in regions like Travancore,
Madras, Mysore, Cochin, Bengal the proportion was 70 to 80 per
cent. There were several other small innovations that helped weavers
improve their productivity and compete with the mill sector.

Certain groups of weavers were in a better position than others to
survive the competition with mill industries. Amongst weavers some
produced coarse cloth while others wove finer varieties. The coarser
cloth was bought by the poor and its demand fluctuated violently.
In times of bad harvests and famines, when the rural poor had little
to eat, and their cash income disappeared, they could not possibly
buy cloth. The demand for the finer varieties bought by the
well-to-do was more stable. The rich could buy these even when the
poor starved. Famines did not affect the sale of Banarasi or
Baluchari saris. Moreover, as you have seen, mills could not imitate
specialised weaves. Saris with woven borders, or the famous lungis
and handkerchiefs of Madras, could not be easily displaced by
mill production.
Weavers and other craftspeople who continued to expand
production through the twentieth century, did not necessarily prosper.
They lived hard lives and worked long hours. Very often the entire
household – including all the women and children – had to work at
various stages of the production process. But they were not simply
remnants of past times in the age of factories. Their life and labour
was integral to the process of industrialisation.

Madras
Bombay

Bengal
Bihar
United Provinces
Punjab

Central Provinces

www.tiwariacademy.com

India and the Contemporary World

124
6 Market for Goods

We have seen how British manufacturers attempted to take over
the Indian market, and how Indian weavers and craftsmen, traders
and industrialists resisted colonial controls, demanded tariff
protection, created their own spaces, and tried to extend the market
for their produce.
But when new products are produced people have to be
persuaded to buy them. They have to feel like using the product.
How was this done?
One way in which new consumers are created is through
advertisements. As you know, advertisements make products appear
desirable and necessary. They try to shape the minds of people and
create new needs. Today we live in a world where advertisements
surround us. They appear in newspapers, magazines, hoardings, street
walls, television screens. But if we look back into history we find
that from the very beginning of the industrial age, advertisements
have played a part in expanding the markets for products, and in
shaping a new consumer culture.
When Manchester industrialists began selling cloth in India, they put
labels on the cloth bundles. The label was needed to make the place
of manufacture and the name of the company familiar to the buyer.
The label was also to be a mark of quality. When buyers saw ‘MADE
IN MANCHESTER’ written in bold on the label, they were
expected to feel confident about buying the cloth.


But labels did not only carry words and texts. They also carried
images and were very often beautifully illustrated. If we look
at these old labels, we can have some idea of the mind of the
manufacturers, their calculations, and the way they appealed to
the people.
Images of Indian gods and goddesses regularly appeared on these
labels. It was as if the association with gods gave divine approval to
the goods being sold. The imprinted image of Krishna or Saraswati
was also intended to make the manufacture from a foreign land
appear somewhat familiar to Indian people.
By the late nineteenth century, manufacturers were printing calendars
to popularise their products. Unlike newspapers and magazines,
calendars were used even by people who could not read. They were
hung in tea shops and in poor people’s homes just as much as in
offices and middle-class apartments. And those who hung the
calendars had to see the advertisements, day after day, through the
year. In these calendars, once again, we see the figures of gods being
used to sell new products.
Like the images of gods, figures of important personages, of
emperors and nawabs, adorned advertisement and calendars. The
message very often seemed to say: if you respect the royal figure,
then respect this product; when the product was being used by
kings, or produced under royal command, its quality could not
be questioned.
When Indian manufacturers advertised the nationalist message was
clear and loud. If you care for the nation then buy products that
Indians produce. Advertisements became a vehicle of the nationalist
message of swadeshi.