
Development

The idea of development or progress
has always been with us. We have
aspirations or desires about what we
would like to do and how we would
like to live. Similarly, we have ideas
about what a country should be like.
What are the essential things that we
require? Can life be better for all? How
should people live together? Can there
be more equality? Development
involves thinking about these
questions and about the ways in
which we can work towards achieving
these goals. This is a complex
task and in this chapter we shall
make a beginning at understanding
development. You will learn more
about these issues in greater depth
in higher classes. Also, you will find
answers to many of these questions
not just in economics but also in your
course in history and political science.
This is because the way we live today
is influenced by the past. We can’t
desire for change without being aware
of this. In the same way, it is only
through a democratic political
process that these hopes and
possibilities can be achieved in
real life.

DEVELOPMENT DEVELOPMENT DEVELOPMENT

“Without me they cannot develop...
in this system I cannot develop!”

4 UNDERSTANDING ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
Let us try to imagine what
development or progress is likely to
mean to different persons listed in
Table 1.1. What are their aspirations?
You will find that some columns are
partially filled. Try to complete the
table. You can also add any other
category of persons.

Category of Person
Landless rural labourers

Prosperous farmers from Punjab
Farmers who depend only on
rain for growing crops
A rural woman from a land
owning family
Urban unemployed youth
A boy from a rich urban family
A girl from a rich urban family
An adivasi from Narmada valley

WHAT DEVELOPMENT PROMISES —
DIFFERENT PEOPLE, DIFFERENT GOALS

Having filled Table 1.1, let us now
examine it. Do all of these persons
have the same notion of development
or progress? Most likely not. Each
one of them seeks different things.

They seek things that are most
important for them, i.e., that which
can fulfil their aspirations or desires.
In fact, at times, two persons or
groups of persons may seek things

 DEVELOPMENTAL GOALS OF DIFFERENT

CATEGORIES OF PERSONS

Developmental Goals / Aspirations
More days of work and better wages; local school is able to
provide quality education for their children; there is no social
discrimination and they too can become leaders in the village.
Assured a high family income through higher support prices for
their crops and through hardworking and cheap labourers; they
should be able to settle their children abroad.

She gets as much freedom as her brother and is able to
decide what she wants to do in life. She is able to pursue her
studies abroad.

YOU WANT A CAR? THE WAY OUR COUNTRY IS
SET UP ALL YOU CAN HOPE FOR IS MAY BE TO
ONE DAY OWN THE RICKSHAW YOU PULL!

www.tiwariacademy.com

which are conflicting. A girl expects
as much freedom and opportunity as
her brother, and that he also shares
in the household work. Her brother
may not like this. Similarly, to get
more electricity, industrialists may
want more dams. But this may
submerge the land and disrupt the
lives of people who are displaced – such
as tribals. They might resent this and
may prefer small check dams or tanks
to irrigate their land.

So, two things are quite clear: one,
different persons can have
different developmental goals and
two, what may be development for
one may not be development for
the other. It may even be
destructive for the other.

A demonstration
meeting against
raising the height
of Sardar
Sarovar Dam on
Narmada River

INCOME AND OTHER GOALS
If you go over Table 1.1 again, you
will notice one common thing: what
people desire are regular work, better
wages, and decent price for their crops
or other products that they produce.
In other words, they want more
income.

Besides seeking more income, one-
way or the other, people also seek

things like equal treatment, freedom,
security, and respect of others. They
resent discrimination. All these are
important goals. In fact, in some cases,
these may be more important than

more income or more consumption
because material goods are not all
that you need to live.
Money, or material things that one
can buy with it, is one factor on which
our life depends. But the quality of our
life also depends on non-material
things mentioned above. If it is not
obvious to you, then just think of the
role of your friends in your life. You
may desire their friendship. Similarly,
there are many things that are not
easily measured but they mean a lot
to our lives. These are often ignored.

THOSE PEOPLE
DON’T WANT TO
DEVELOP!

6 UNDERSTANDING ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
1. Why do different persons have different notions of development? Which of the following
explanations is more important and why?
(a) Because people are different.
(b) Because life situations of persons are different.
2. Do the following two statements mean the same? Justify your answer.
(a) People have different developmental goals.
(b) People have conflicting developmental goals.
3. Give some examples where factors other than income are important aspects of our lives.
4. Explain some of the important ideas of the above section in your own words.
LET’S WORK THESE OUT

However, it will be wrong to conclude
that what cannot be measured is not
important.
Consider another example. If you
get a job in a far off place, before
accepting it you would try to consider
many factors, apart from income,
such as facilities for your family,
working atmosphere, or opportunity
to learn. In another case, a job may
give you less pay but may offer regular
employment that enhances your
sense of security. Another job,
however, may offer high pay but no
job security and also leave no time for
your family. This will reduce your
sense of security and freedom.

Similarly, for development,
people look at a mix of goals. It is
true that if women are engaged in paid
work, their dignity in the household
and society increases. However, it is
also the case that if there is respect
for women there would be more
sharing of housework and a
greater acceptance of women
working outside. A safe and secure
environment may allow more women
to take up a variety of jobs or run
a business.
Hence, the developmental goals
that people have are not only about
better income but also about other
important things in life.

If, as we have seen above, individuals
seek different goals, then their notion
of national development is also likely
to be different. Discuss among
yourselves on what India should do
for development.
Most likely, you would find that
different students in the class have given
different answers to the above question.
In fact, you might yourself think of
many different answers and not be too
sure of any of these. It is very
important to keep in mind that

different persons could have
different as well as conflicting
notions of a country’s development.
However, can all the ideas be
considered equally important? Or, if
there are conflicts how does one
decide? What would be a fair and just
path for all? We also have to think
whether there is a better way of doing
things. Would the idea benefit a large
number of people or only a small
group? National development means
thinking about these questions.


Discuss the following situations:
1. Look at the picture on the right. What should
be the developmental goals for such an area?
2. Read this newspaper report and answer the
questions that follow:
LET’S WORK THESE OUT

If even the idea of what constitutes
development can be varied and
conflicting, then certainly there can be
differences about ways of developing. If
you know of any such
controversy, try to find out
arguments advanced by different
people. You may do so by talking to
different persons or you may find it from
newspapers and television.
(i) Who are the people who benefited
and who did not?
(ii) What should be the developmental
goal for this country?
3. What can be some of the developmental goals for your village, town or locality?

ACTIVITY 1

A vessel dumped 500 tonnes
of liquid toxic wastes into
open-air dumps in a city and
in the surrounding sea. This
happened in a city called
Abidjan in Ivory Coast, a
country in Africa. The fumes
from the highly toxic waste
caused nausea, skin rashes,
fainting, diarrhoea etc. After a
month seven persons were
dead, twenty in hospital and
twenty six thousand treated
for symptoms of poisoning.
A multinational company
dealing in petroleum and
metals had contracted a local
company of the Ivory Coast to
dispose the toxic waste from
its ship.

8 UNDERSTANDING ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
You might ask — if development can
mean different things, how come some
countries are generally called
developed and others under -
developed? Before we come to this,
let us consider another question.
When we compare different things,
they could have similarities as well as
differences. Which aspects do we use
to compare them? Let us look at
students in the class itself. How do
we compare different students? They
differ in their height, health, talents
and interests. The healthiest student
may not be the most studious one.
The most intelligent student may not
be the friendliest one. So, how do we
compare students? The criterion we
may use depends on the purpose of
comparison. We use different criterion
to choose a sports team, a debate
team, a music team or a team to
organise a picnic. Still, if for some
purpose, we have to choose the
criterion for the all-round progress of
children in the class, how shall we
do it?
Usually we take one or more
important characteristics of
persons and compare them based
on these characteristics. Of
course, there can be differences about
what are important characteristics
that should form the basis of
comparison: friendliness and spirit of
cooperation, creativity or marks
secured?
This is true of development too.
For comparing countries, their
income is considered to be one of
the most important attributes.
Countries with higher income are

more developed than others with less
income. This is based on the
understanding that more income
means more of all things that human
beings need. Whatever people like,
and should have, they will be able to
get with greater income. So, greater
income itself is considered to be one
important goal.
Now, what is the income of a
country? Intuitively, the income of the
country is the income of all the
residents of the country. This gives
us the total income of the country.
However, for comparison between
countries, total income is not such an
useful measure. Since, countries have
different populations, comparing total
income will not tell us what an average
person is likely to earn. Are people in
one country better off than others in a
different country? Hence, we compare
the average income which is the total
income of the country divided by its
total population. The average income
is also called per capita income.
In World Development Report
2006, brought out by the World
Bank, this criterion is used in
classifying countries. Countries with
per capita income of Rs 4,53,000 per
annum and above in 2004, are called
rich countries and those with per
capita income of Rs 37,000 or less are
called low-income countries. India
comes in the category of low-income
countries because its per capita
income in 2004 was just Rs 28,000
per annum. The rich countries,
excluding countries of Middle East
and certain other small countries, are
generally called developed countries.
HOW TO COMPARE DIFFERENT COUNTRIES
OR STATES?


I II III IV V Average
Country A 9500 10500 9800 10000 10200
Country B 500 500 500 500 48000

assured of being its fifth citizen
but if it is a lottery that decides
our citizenship number then
perhaps most of us will prefer to
live in country A. Even though
both the countries have identical
average income, country A is
preferred because it has more
equitable distribution. In this
country people are neither very
rich nor extremely poor. On the
other hand most citizens in
country B are poor and one
person is extremely rich. Hence,
while average income is useful
for comparison it does not tell us
how this income is distributed
among people.

1. Give three examples where an average is used for comparing situations.
2. Why do you think average income is an important criterion for development? Explain.
3. Besides size of per capita income, what other property of income is important in
comparing two or more societies?
4. Suppose records show that the average income in a country has been increasing
over a period of time. From this, can we conclude that all sections of the economy
have become better? Illustrate your answer with an example.
5. From the text, find out the per capita income level of middle-income countries as
per WDR 2006.
6. Write a paragraph on your notion of what should India do, or achieve, to become a
developed country.
LET’S WORK THESE OUT

Average Income Average Income

While ‘averages’ are useful for comparison, they also hide disparities.

Will you be equally happy to live in both these
countries? Are both equally developed? Perhaps
some of us may like to live in country B if we are
For example, let us consider two countries, A and
B. For the sake of simplicity, we have assumed
that they have only five citizens each. Based on
data given in Table 1.2, calculate the
average income for both the countries.
TABLE 1.2 COMPARISON OF TWO

COUNTRIES

COUNTRY WITH NO RICH AND NO POOR COUNTRY WITH RICH AND POOR
WE
MADE THE
CHAIRS
AND WE
USE
THEM.

DEVELOPMENT 9
WE
MADE THE
CHAIRS
AND HE
TOOK
THEM.

10 UNDERSTANDING ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

When we looked at individual
aspirations and goals, we
found that people not only
think of better income but
also have goals such as
security, respect for others,
equal treatment, freedom etc.
in mind. Similarly, when we
think of a nation or a region,
we may, besides average
income, think of other equally
important attributes.
INCOME AND OTHER CRITERIA

What could these attributes be?
Let us examine this through an
example. Table 1.3 gives the per capita
income of Punjab, Kerala and Bihar.
Actually, these figures are of Per
Capita Net State Domestic Product at
Current Prices for 2002-03. Let us
ignore what this complicated term
exactly means. Roughly we can take
it to be per capita income of the state.
We find that of the three, Punjab has
the highest per capita income and

SOME COMPARATIVE DATA ON
PUNJAB, KERALA AND BIHAR
 PER CAPITA INCOME
OF SELECT STATES
State Per Capita Income
for 2002-03 (in Rs)
Punjab 26000
Kerala 22800
Bihar 5700

State Infant Mortality Rate Literacy Rate (%) Net Attendance Ratio
per 1,000 (2003) (2001) for Class I-V (1995-96)
Punjab 49 70 81
Kerala 11 91 91
Bihar 60 47 41
Explanation of some of the terms used in this table:
Infant Mortality Rate (or IMR) indicates the number of children that die before the age of one
year as a proportion of 1000 live children born in that particular year.
Literacy Rate measures the proportion of literate population in the 7 and above age group.
Net Attendance Ratio is the total number of children of age group 6-10 attending school as a
percentage of total number of children in the same age group.

Bihar is at the bottom. This means
that, on an average, a person in
Punjab earned Rs 26,000 in one year
whereas, on an average, a person in
Bihar would earn only around
Rs 5,500. So, if per capita income
were to be used as the measure of
development, Punjab will be
considered the most developed and
Bihar the least developed state of the
three. Now, let us look at certain other
data pertaining to these states given

PUBLIC FACILITIES
What does this table show? The
first column of the table shows that in
Kerala, out of 1000 children born alive
11 died before completing one year of
age but in Punjab the proportion of
children dying within one year of birth
is 49, which is nearly five times more.
On the other hand, the per capita
income of Punjab is much more than
Kerala as shown in Table 1.3. Just
think of how dear you are to your
parents, think of how every one is so
happy when a child is born. Now, try
to think of parents whose children die
before they even celebrate their first
birthday. How painful it must be to
these parents? Next, note the year to
which this data pertains. It is 2003.
So we are not talking of old times; it is
56 years after independence when our
metro towns are full of high-rise
buildings and shopping malls!

How is it that the average person in
Punjab has more income than the
average person in Kerala but lags
behind in these crucial areas? The
reason is — money in your pocket
cannot buy all the goods and
services that you may need to live
well. So, income by itself is not a
completely adequate indicator of
material goods and services that
citizens are able to use. For example,
normally, your money cannot buy
you a pollution-free environment or
ensure that you get unadulterated
medicines, unless you can afford to
shift to a community that already has
all these things. Money may also not
be able to protect you from infectious
diseases, unless the whole of your
community takes preventive steps.

The problem does not end with
Infant Mortality Rate. The last column
shows that more that half of the
children in Bihar do not even get to
go to school. This means that if you
went to school in Bihar more than half
of your class would be missing. Those
who could have been in school are not
there! If this had happened to you,
you would not be able to read what
you are reading now.

Actually for many of the important
things in life the best way, also the
cheapest way, is to provide these goods
and services collectively. Just think –
will it be cheaper to have collective
security for the whole locality or for
each house to have its own security
man? What if no one, other than you,
in your village or locality is interested
in studying? Would you be able to
study? Not unless your parents could
afford to send you to some private
school elsewhere. So you are actually
able to study because many other
children also want to study and
because many people believe that the
government should open schools and
provide other facilities so that all
children have a chance to study. Even
now, in many areas, children,
particularly girls, are not able to
achieve secondary level schooling
because government/society has
not provided adequate facilities.
Most babies do not get basic health care

12 UNDERSTANDING ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT


POPULATION OF UTTAR PRADESH
Category Male Female
Literacy rate for rural population 52% 19%
Literacy rate for children in age group 10-14 years 68% 39%
Percentage of rural children aged 10-14 attending school 64% 31%
Kerala has a low Infant Mortality
Rate because it has adequate
provision of basic health and
educational facilities. Similarly, in
some states, the Public Distribution
System (PDS) functions well. If some

PDS shop, i.e. ration shop, does not
function properly in such places, the
people there are able to get the
problem rectified. Health and
nutritional status of people of such
states is certainly likely to be better.


Once it is realised that even though
the level of income is important, yet
it is an inadequate measure of the
level of development, we begin to
think of other criterion. There could
be a long list of such criterion but
then it would not be so useful. What
we need is a small number of the
most important things. Health and
education indicators, such as the
ones we used in comparison of
Kerala and Punjab, are among them.
Over the past decade or so, health
and education indicators have come
to be widely used along with income
as a measure of development. For
instance, Human Development
Report published by UNDP compares
countries based on the educational
levels of the people, their health
status and per capita income. It
would be interesting to look at
certain relevant data regarding India
and its neighbours from Human
Development Report 2006.


FOR 2004

Country Per Capita Life Literacy rate Gross enrolment HDI rank in
Income expectancy for 15+ yrs ratio for three the world
in US$ at birth population levels

Sri Lanka 4390 74 91 69 93
India 3139 64 61 60 126
Myanmar 1027 61 90 48 130
Pakistan 2225 63 50 35 134
Nepal 1490 62 50 61 138
Bangladesh 1870 63 41 53 137
NOTES
1. HDI stands for Human Development Index. HDI ranks in above table are out of 177 countries in all.
2. Life expectancy at birth denotes, as the name suggests, average expected length of life of a person at
the time of birth.
3. Gross Enrolment Ratio for three levels means enrolment ratio for primary school, secondary school and
higher education beyond secondary school.
4. Per Capita Income is calculated in dollars for all countries so that it can be compared. It is also done in
a way so that every dollar would buy the same amount of goods and services in any country.
ACTIVITY 3
One way to find out if adults are undernourished is to
calculate what nutrition scientists call Body Mass
Index (BMI). This is easy to calculate. Take the weight
of the person in kg. Then take the height in metres.
Divide the weight by the square of the height. If this
figure is less than 18.5 then the person would be
considered undernourished. However, if this BMI is
more than 25, then a person is overweight. Do
remember that this criterion is not applicable to growing
children.
Let each student in a
class find out the weight
and height of three adult
persons of different
economic backgrounds
such as construction
workers, domestic
servants, office workers,
business-persons etc.
Collect the data from
all the students and
make a combined table.
Calculate their BMI. Do
you find any relationship
between economic
background of person and
her/his nutritional status?

14 UNDERSTANDING ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
Isn’t it surprising that a small
country in our neighbourhood, Sri
Lanka, is much ahead of India in every
respect and a big country like ours
has such a low rank in the world?
Table 1.6 also shows that though
Nepal has half the per capita income
of India, yet it is not far behind India
in life expectancy and literacy levels.
Many improvements have been
suggested in calculating HDI and
many new components have been

Whichever way we define
development, suppose for the present
that a particular country is quite
developed. We would certainly like this
level of development to go up further
or at least be maintained for future
generations. This is obviously
desirable. However, since the second
half of the twentieth century, a number
of scientists have been warning that
the present type, and levels, of
development are not sustainable.
